I would like to talk to you about an
exciting opportunity
I just need 30 minutes of your time to
explain it but it has the potential to
transform your life I'm talking about
multi-level marketing companies or MLM
companies like Mary Kay
Rodan and fields a new skin and way and
Herbalife they sell different products
but generally MLMs have two main things
in common first you don't see them on
store shelves you buy them through
distributors like a friends family and
co-workers and secondly those
distributors are always looking for more
people to join them and they have a
pretty attractive message why over life
because you get to be your own boss earn
extra money
work from home raise your own children
you can name your own hours make
part-time or full-time money paying the
bills share this video with ten people
that you care about that you love that's
your door that you admire 20 people 30
people come on what are you waiting for
100 people share with everybody they
want what we have we got it okay hold on
I'm supposed to share that with 10
people I love adore and admire
that's a tough ask let's see there are
the judges on this season of Project
Runway that's three all this Tim Gunn
that's obviously four if you count Tim
Gunn twice that's five but I'm still
five short and I am out now and before
you brush this industry off you should
know collectively it did around thirty
six billion dollars in retail sales last
year in the u.s. you probably know
someone who is considering joining an
MLM or who already has and is posting
about it ten times a day on Facebook or
Instagram and if you do know someone
like that or have considered signing up
yourself this story is important because
let me explain how the system is
supposed to work
generally distributors have two main
ways to make money sell the product
itself whether it's makeup vitamins or
health shakes and earn money on those
sales and and this is key recruit other
people into the company and get money
based on their sales and the sales of
people they recruit intern
just look at Vemma a few years ago a
hidden camera caught our then
distributor for that company walking a
prospective recruit through just how
easy it can be
you and I would sign up and get there
Samantha there's nine people there right
gets their money back
wait you kind of get your money back
that's as reassuring as hearing a doctor
say he kind of knows where your appendix
is it's probably somewhere near the
spleen and if you are thinking well hold
on that business structure sounds
familiar
isn't that a pyramid scheme well there
was a journalist waiting outside to ask
the exact same question it's not an
illegal pyramid scheme it's a Direct
Selling never what does it shape like a
pyramid the businesses shaped like a
pyramid yes but you're saying it's not
an illegal pyramid it's not an illegal
pyramid scheme oh I get it so it's not a
pyramid it's just pyramid shaped you
know like a Dorito or an angry bird or
just a pile of but let's put
that pyramid question aside for a moment
because from the outside these companies
do have the trappings of legitimacy many
have high profile celebrity endorses
vemma had noted science experts Jenny
McCarthy AdvoCare has esteemed ball
thrower Drew Brees and an MLM called max
international had this guy after more
than a year of due diligence gene and I
joined max international as home-based
distributors and media spokespersons Oh
to be a fly on the wall while Gina and
Chuck were poring over the numbers
during that year long due diligence
session Gina with an adding machine
Chuck randomly kicking stuff it'll be
like watching Lennon and McCartney write
Sergeant Pepper
still for many MLMs the biggest
celebrity is their founder who can enjoy
cult-like status just look at JR
Ridinger
CEO of market America at company
conferences the guy makes quite an
entrance
[Music]
okay fourth string wedding chapel Elvis
calm the down
and that's just his walk-on once he gets
going he puts on a real show
demonstrating how you can pump money
dramatizing the rat race by sweaty Lee
running around in a giant wheel and
screaming at the gravestone of Joe
nobody who never fulfilled his true
potential job the more man the dreams
you told me about we can actually do
them now we don't have to wait man it
works and I'm doing it and I want to
help you do it because it's so good Joe
this is amazing we can we can have
vacations and sailboats and we can have
multiple homes and you can give your
wife the the jewelry that she deserves
then you're gonna be a hero come on get
up holy all I can say is thank
goodness funerals don't have a speak now
or forever hold your peace section
because he would be at every cemetery
delivering motivational speeches
she lived a good life loser come back to
life at all you can still have that
yachts come back to life the dangling of
vast lifestyle improvements is at the
heart of the MLM pitch their materials
feature flashy cars and luxury travel
that you can achieve and just watch a
distributor from youngevity walk you
through a future dream scenario in
exquisite detail in two years this is
what's gonna happen to you you are gonna
you're gonna drive to your work you're
gonna walk into your boss's office
you're gonna sit down and you're gonna
quit your job
[Music]
you're gonna explain that that little
pyramid scheme thing that you almost got
terminated for last year you're now an
entrepreneur and you're gonna be doing
that full-time whoa did you just say
pyramid scheme and then almost got
terminated and then you're going to go
out to the parking lot you're gonna get
into your silver Mercedes that
youngevity has paid for and you're gonna
drive home oh no wait actually first
you're gonna drive to the bank I'm sorry
I hate to dwell on this but you
definitely said pyramid skating back
then I'm sorry now we're suddenly going
to the bank and you're gonna walk into
the bank and you're gonna deposit your
coding bonus and the lady's gonna say
will that be checking or savings and
you're gonna say yeah I don't really
care I get these all the time and then
the lady's gonna say haha that's
fantastic but I actually need to know
which account this goes into and you're
gonna say makes no difference to me and
she's gonna say but I can't deposit this
unless you specify which account it's
policy and you're going to say it's all
gravy and she's gonna say how about
checking and you're gonna say I'm loving
it and she's gonna say do I need to get
security and you're gonna say the
account ending in eight four two four
please now youngevity told us that that
woman's claims are not authorized by the
company and are against youngevity
policy which forbids income claims
although that video was taken at one of
their official events and the woman
Denise Chenault
is featured with her husband on the
company website with the words Denise
and Tom Chennault are youngevity oh come
on you don't let someone embody your
company if you don't agree with them if
Flo turned out to run a dogfighting ring
progessive would wipe her off their
websites immediately and by the way you
know that's coming you can see in her
eyes
dead dogs dancing in there but but you
cannot deny the picture that she paints
is enticing who doesn't want to tell
their boss to go themselves half my
staff would do it right now if they
could but MLMs hold out the hope that if
you work hard you can take control of
your life start your own business and
help your family but how real is the
opportunity well let's take a look at
just one of these companies in-depth
Herbalife you saw its pitch earlier it
was the one that you were supposed to
send to ten twenty a hundred people
it sells nutritional supplements like
shakes and vitamins and it's one of the
biggest MLMs around with net sales of
4.5 billion dollars last year it has a
celebrities who talk up its benefits
from superstar athletes like Cristiano
Ronaldo to pretty much the last person
you are expecting to see in this piece
well first of all you have a great
product that makes all the difference
here we go sorry buddy you're a product
to the product well I am a product with
the product it has every combination of
things that I like it's a very good
product delivered by really good people
yes that is Madeleine Albright talking
to Herbalife CEO claiming she's a
product of the product so forget
studying at Columbia and Johns Hopkins
if you want to be like the first female
Secretary of State just chug a couple of
vanilla adjacent you tree shakes a day
and thank her in the morning oh and
about those products in its early days
Herbalife was accused of overstating
their health benefits claiming in the
80s that one product helped relieve
everything from venereal disease to
tumors to bedwetting and back then their
founder Mark Hughes was asked by a
Senate subcommittee to answer experts
who'd called his diet products into
question and this was his response I
think if they're so expert in weight
loss why were they so fat yesterday it
seems to me and I'm not trying to make
any jokes but I do think that they ought
to use our product first he seems great
but second why would anyone in the 80s
take Herbalife to lose weight they had
cocaine
come to think of it we also have cocaine
the point is cocaine is an effective
weight loss option it's not where I
thought I was going with this but it is
where we have ended up now to be fair
that was 30 years ago and a lot has
changed at the company since then
although when ABC News filmed some
Herbalife distributors just two years
ago they found some claims that seemed
to echo the company's past this
Herbalife distributor in New York City
told us the story of a woman who
overcame an inoperable brain tumor
thanks to Herbalife new recruits were
told
Herbalife products help to treat heart
disease even helped one woman get
pregnant well that is obviously
nutritional shakes cannot help you get
pregnant there are only three liquids
that can do that a glass of merlot the
honey smooth music of Sharda and good
old-fashioned jeers people might be
making claims like that because they are
desperate to move excess product you
think broadly speaking under Herbalife
system distributors can get bonuses and
massive discounts on products based on
how much they buy which can be a huge
incentive to buy in bulk and for
instance let's say you're selling
Herbalife's disgusting creamy chicken
soup powder for 1335 a box the cheaper
you can buy it from Herbalife the more
profit you could make but to stay
qualified for those higher discounts you
have to keep buying product and it might
not be easy to sell that extra soup
because a it's a little pricey and B we
actually tried it and it tastes like the
wood shavings inside a gerbil cage and
as one former top distributor will tell
you if you are just accumulating product
that can lead to a problem common enough
to have a special name we'd call it
garage qualified they would stack as
much product as they can in their garage
and at some point they would realize
that they have to quit so people buy
product more than they can then they can
sell it sits in a garage
what happens there's got to be an end
point here at some point when they run
out of money there's an end point
exactly so over life maybe an industry
leader in worthless crap people stick in
their garage along with of course the PT
Cruiser the car that looks like a sporty
version of a hearse and and as a
distributor it is not easy to figure out
exactly how you are going to make money
just watch this Herbalife video from a
few years ago explaining one narrow part
of their insanely convoluted
compensation plan okay here we go take a
look at this example
now when e places a four thousand by n
point order at forty two percent this
counts as personal volume for you
but since this qualifies eat a
supervisor with a one-month
qualification that volume now becomes
encumbered for everyone in the upline
remember each upline distributor needs
to accumulate 1000 unencumbered volume
points if they want to qualify for
supervisor as well it's simple and if
you accumulate 10,000 unencumbered
volume points those are grouped into an
unencumbered batch which qualifies
benedict cumberbatch for one
unencumbered cucumber cummerbund well
yes that is absolute nonsense
it makes exactly as much sense as
everything that came before it in fact
to hear another former Herbalife
distributor tell it your main focus in
the business might be less on products
than on the people below you you don't
make money from selling products you
make a little not much not enough to pay
the bills that are wrecking up you make
money from signing people up of course
it's like that famous salesmanship motto
from Glengarry Glen Ross abst CE OS TOS
always be selling the concept of selling
to other sales people and at this point
that's pyramid scheme question that we
set aside earlier has to be addressed
because in broad terms
if distributors earnings come primarily
from selling products to actual
customers outside of the company that is
probably a legitimate business but
if those earnings come primarily from
selling product to the distributors
you've recruited below you and their
sales of product to the distributors
they've recruited below them or within
the company that may be a pyramid scheme
and any business that is set up that way
has a big problem for a reason that and
I will warn you does involve math almost
all of these schemes tell you that you
can make money by just recruiting three
or four five let's say five then you let
the five do they're five that gives you
twenty five what they don't show you is
that you could only do that 13 cycles
and you would exceed the population of
the earth it's true within 14 cycles you
run out of people and that is assuming
that everyone on earth wants to be a
protein shake distributor and I can
think of at least a few people who have
better things to do Alan Alda
for instance or Malala yousufzai or
Morten Harket lead singer of aha
the guy is still swimming in take on me
money he doesn't need this an
Herbalife CEO Michael Johnson has an
interesting way of deflecting that whole
pyramid scheme question I go back to any
company I started in Disney as a
director then I went to be executive
vice president and then president of the
international entity of the company so I
moved up six or seven levels and at the
top was sitting Basile of the company
Michael Eisner is that a pyramid is that
any different than what we're doing here
yes it is completely different Disney
was a corporate ladder those were all
salaried positions with benefits the
company wasn't banking on you personally
filling your garage with cases of unsold
DVDs of The Lion King to Simba's pride
but but johnson could have made a
stronger non pyramid case in that
interview if he could have just shown
how much money distributors get from
selling product to actual retail
customers but conveniently Herbalife
didn't keep records of those figures now
unfortunately for them the FTC recently
finished a multi-year investigation into
the car
and filed a blistering complaint walking
right up to the line of outright calling
it a pyramid scheme ave alleged
Herbalife's compensation program doesn't
incentivize retail sales but rather the
recruiting of additional participants
who fuel the enterprise by making
wholesale purchases of product which
sounds like you know how pyramid schemes
work and when people pointed this out
the FTC chair made an amazing statement
[Music]
our focus isn't on the label the word
appeared pyramid does not appear in our
complaint that is true they were not
determined not to have been a pyramid
think about what she just said they're
not determined not to be a pyramid how
is that not a huge warning sign if the
FDA announced we have not determined
cotton candy not to be clown pubes you
would never risk eating that ever
again now now who knows why the FTC
stopped short
perhaps it ensured Herbalife agreed to a
settlement in which they neither
admitted nor denied wrongdoing but did
pay two hundred million dollars and
agree to significant new changes but the
contents of this complaint are
mind-blowing the FTC claims that the
overwhelming majority of Herbalife
distributors who pursue the business
opportunity make little or no money and
a substantial percentage lose money in
fact the FTC even stated Herbalife is
going to have to start operating
legitimately which implies they hadn't
been up till then and yet amazingly
Michael Johnson characterized this as a
victory hey we've got great news we've
reached an agreement with the US Federal
Trade Commission that ensures that our
mission to improve people's lives will
continue to thrive I have to tell you
this is really good news and it comes at
a time when our business is growing
bigger and better than ever before
Oh
just polish that turd he put it in a
bottle and convinced people that they
could make a fortune selling nutritional
turds in their spare time but look
whether Herbalife is a pyramid not a
pyramid or not not a pyramid it is true
that Herbalife is growing and a lot of
that growth has come from Latino
communities where Herbalife has been
aggressively expanding for years they
even brought a sponsorship on the hit
telenovela La Fea must bear it's very
subtle to just see if you can spot it
look it's called Herbalife this is going
to help you have more energy and it's
also going to help you face all the
problems you have believe me really I
drink it every day and besides it's
delicious if that is happening on the
show I can't imagine the real drama
happening in the commercials mr. Geico
lizard I want to say 15% on car
insurance
but how can i when you are sleeping with
my wife and the fact a large percentage
of Herbalife's business comes from
Latinos is a point of pride for Michael
Johnson we call it your Bligh family and
we're not ashamed of that we're very
proud of that the Latino the the blood
if you will them well you know if it's
in this company and it feels great I
love the blood of a Latino community I
just want to bathe in it I want to bathe
in your blood lapsing he knows how's
this sales pitch going I feel like it's
going way no to those supplies that
Latino blood it can feel less than great
as this community meeting of those who
feel burned by Herbalife shows where the
negocio y yeah pero de la cantidad we
don't mil dlares in my message over d
diamond dollars her husband continuously
reminds her about $8,000 that she owes
to them el producto 7 C so C noticias
tirta bas the vendor loophole ok - lo
comp rust-eze una Grampian yes a via KO
no tena su dinero y esta bien muy bien
de la mia mia
evie ho tu tienes que me a hint
Abajo TT para que una ganancia le dije
sabes que is on the to take Eva
Castilian oh boy espera nadion mas so yo
you know what now might be a good time
to point out when someone says their
blood is in me and it feels great that
is what a vampire says and friends of
yours may say well that's just over life
my MLM is different but there are echoes
of what you've seen across this industry
for instance Herbalife is far from the
only company that has made bold product
claims regarding health when I started
my body fat was 37.5 and now it's right
around 1617 the pain and the lethargy
that go along with fibromyalgia is gone
three days into the experience I was
feeling like 25 years younger when I
found out they had a pet formulation of
liquid by ourselves that's when I knew I
had something very exclusive after
putting Rembrandt on liquid bile style
pet for three months he started walking
again okay first of all obviously good
boy Rembrandt
but second are you sure he didn't just
summon the energy to walk because he was
desperate to get away from the
eyedropper of liquid nonsense you were
shoving in your pets mouths and just
like Herbalife MLMs can often have
Scientology like levels for you to
ascend through with USANA you may have
gone from sharer
to believer to Builder to achiever and
beyond and at Kyani you passed through a
series of ranks with the names of
gemstones as a one distributor explained
at a company conference I want to talk
about a millionaire mindset because if
you got involved in Kyani to become a
Jade you're selling yourself short if
you got involved in Kyani become a
diamonds you're not thinking big enough
yet if you haven't already visualized
yourself a double black diamonds
you need to kick yourself in the rear
now double black diamond is technically
a skiing term for particularly dangerous
slopes
and I'm thinking maybe you shouldn't
choose a term that basically says if you
even try this you'll go downhill fast
and may end up in a king ditch and the
garage qualified issue is not exclusive
to Herbalife either it's come up with
multiple other MLM including Mary Kay I
start with my own two eyes the
warehousing of the product meaning they
had basements full of it or closets full
of it or garages full of it take a look
at this inventory from a consultant who
is leaving the company she agreed to
show us boxes of product she said she
bought to keep her status Wow so it
seems some distributors may have been
more customer than salesperson that's
what finding out Jamie Lee Curtis was
actually the one eating all the
activator I eat a hundred and forty six
containers a day and I like a
machine gun and Mary Kay an Herbalife
will tell you that stockpiling is
uncommon and you can return unsold
products for a refund but you should
know those refunds can be partial or may
involve resigning the point is MMS may
present themselves as a great
opportunity but your chance of success
is actually remote just look at the
income disclosure statements kyani's
shows that just under 40 percent of
active distributors received a check for
$10 or more meaning that most didn't
even make that and new skins says around
18 percent of active distributors and
Commission checks which is actually
worse than it sounds because active
distributors represent only around 36
percent of total distributors so if you
do the math which they conveniently
didn't that would mean that 93 percent
of all new skin distributors receive
zero Commission's from the company in an
average month so even if you have never
heard of Nu Skin before it may be paying
you just as much as it does 93 percent
of all its distributors now
emmalin's 1/6 those percentages are
misleading they will tell you that many
of their distributors aren't even in the
business to make money they just went to
all that trouble of signing up to get
discounts on their amazing Rhino
ejaculate or as they call it soup well
they'll they'll say individual
distributors like that Vemma guy and
those herbal life reps don't speak for
them and that their claims are against
company policies and violators get
disciplined and most importantly they
will all insist they are not pyramids
and no one claims that any more
spectacular manner than JR Ridinger
who has an airtight case based on
spelling the word pyramids backwards
we're actually the anti pyramid the
reverse pyramid the dipper ripe we are
he sounds like a cult leader about to
demand his followers drink poison and it
frankly doesn't help that he looks like
Jim Jones to a genuinely creepy degree
but it is hard for the FTC to
investigate these companies the industry
is large and opaque and pursuing a case
is a long arduous process
they've only brought around two dozen
pyramid scheme cases against MLM in the
last four decades and MLMs have
surprising lobbying strength there's
actually a direct selling caucus in
Congress with more than 40 bipartisan
members including jason Chaffetz who
worked at Nu Skin for more than a decade
as per Herbalife it has gone to
remarkable lengths to protect its name
in Washington and it's recruited two
former top FTC officials to work for the
company and it's willing to be
incredibly petty as well because
remember that clip of Herbalife victims
that is from an upcoming documentary
called betting on 0 and when it played
at a DC Film Festival earlier this year
the screening had 173 empty seats
because an Herbalife lobbying firm
reportedly bought them out and that's
not just petty it's stupid if you don't
want people to see a movie you don't
need to buy out seats just put up
posters saying starring Shia LaBeouf
job done nobody's there but even if the
government did suddenly decide to crack
down on this industry which seems
unlikely many MLMs have been expanding
overseas here is a video from India via
changing people's life you are the brand
we are growing every day let's master
worth 1 million 1 billion one region
they are lucky Gandhi isn't alive to
hear that song because it would really
test his belief in nonviolent protests
you know what kid everybody pick up a
rock and meet me at herbalife
headquarters that song was unforgivable
just look online and you can find videos
of gigantic Herbalife events around the
world
here is one in South Africa here is one
in Mongolia here's one in Venezuela
here's one in Malaysia and here is
Michael Johnson in Mexico doing this
[Music]
okay I don't say this lightly but that
is douchebaggery at a double black
diamond level so the point is what can
we do
because good hard-working people are
going to keep getting caught up in these
companies there has to be a way to tell
the world about the dangers of MLMs and
I think I might know the perfect
distribution network and that is why
tonight we are starting our own pyramid
scheme hashtag this is a pyramid scheme
because if someone you know is thinking
about joining an MLM this is a huge
opportunity and let me show you how it
works
[Music]
[Applause]
with friends and family the product is
this entire video about why MLM czar
King awful let me break it down for you
by sharing this you can be an
independent distributor for a leading
web video about the dangers of MLM you
can do this full-time or part-time and
give your family the lifestyle they
deserve which is frankly not getting
caught up in this you need
scientific proof that it works we told a
dog we were going to produce this video
and look the dog is walking now able to
walk people sorry we don't keep those
records here is how it works simply
watch this video and then forward it to
five people and then instruct them to
send it to another five people and so on
and so on and so on within 14 cycles
every single person on earth will have
seen this to the point that we will need
to start to create more people
to watch it also if every single person
on earth is watching this video hello
Beyonce I'm a really big fan
and like MLMs we would like to direct a
message to latinos in particular so we
will be uploading two versions of this
segment to YouTube with one in Spanish
but because I do not speak Spanish it
will be subtitled and this before this
portion will be performed by Jaime Camil
from Jane the Virgin professor you are
clearly more attractive version of me in
every way on you honey yes yes yes I am
so please share this video to stop
people getting involved with these
schemes because MLMs are hurting people
and we need to spread the word about
their dangers send this to 20 people 30
people a hundred people what are you
waiting for this system will work and it
is not a dimmer right it's an anti
dimmer right this is a pyramid right
right
this is a better man
[Applause]
goodnight